# Qt Basics

* Qt is a framework for C++ that started as a GUI library but has become much, much more.
    * it has networking functionality, a [reimplementation of the STL](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/containers.html),
    3D graphics with OpenGL, access to smartphone peripherals, etc.
    * The best about Qt is that it is completely cross-platform. You write your code on one machine and compile
    it to run for any other architecture. Supported platforms, among others, are Linux, Windows, Android and iOS.

* This project is mainly about the interaction between the Qt framework and standard C++, not about the use
of Qt.
    * A toy project [notepad-minus-minus](https://github.com/alex-lt-kong/notepad-minus-minus) will be used as an
    example demonstrating some basic internals of Qt.
    * While Qt now supports a few different languages, for the purpose of this repository, only C++ is covered.
    
## the `.ui`

* The `.ui` file is in XML format and it is used to define the GUI elements of a form. In Qt Creator's WYSIWYG editor
(a.k.a. Qt Designer), any GUI modification directly translates to the `.ui` file change and vice versa. To make the
references easier, let's say we have a form called `mainwindow` in a source code file `mainwindow.cpp`. Its
corresponding `.ui` file is `mainwindow.ui`
    * After adding a GUI element, such as a `label`. We can refer to the element with something
    like `ui->labelWordCount` in `mainwindow.cpp`.

* However, one can observe that elements, such as `labelWordCount`, defined in the `.ui` file are nowhere
to be found in any `mainwindow.cpp` or `mainwindow.h` files. How can they be used in C++ source code and how can
they compile?
  
* The answer is two-fold. To make references and all the syntax highlighting work, we don't need authentic and valid
  C++ code. Qt Creator can support code completion even if the corresponding source code is not there--it can examine
  the `.ui` file, interpret elements definitions in XML and "imagine" such definitions are in C++. Then it provides
  code completion/syntax highlighting based on its "imagination". This is one of the main reasons why usually
  people use the Qt framework with Qt Creator. Qt Creator has dedicated features to support its WYSIWYG functionalities.
  * If we open `.ui` and other `.cpp` files in other code editors, such as VS Code, as these third-party tools do not
  have the same ability to "imagine" the C++ code from XML file on the fly, all the syntax highlighting/code completion
  will be gone.

* While code completion can be done via Qt Creator's imagination, compilers such as `gcc` won't be able to compile
incomplete C++ source code. To make it complete, Qt has another tool called `user interface compiler` or
[uic](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/uic.html).
  * `uic` reads an XML format `.ui` file as generated by Qt Designer and creates a corresponding C++ header file.
  * The file being generated is called `ui_mainwindow.h` under the `build` directory.
  An `include` statement, `#include "ui_mainwindow.h"` is also automatically generated in `mainwindow.cpp`.
  * In the constructor of `mainwindow.cpp`, statement `ui->setupUi(this);` is also automatically generated. This is
  how the `mainwindow` class can always have the definition in its `mainwindow.ui` file.